OK so here we have our example for the first derivative test.
It says Use the first derivative test to classify the relative extrema of f of x he calls x cubed minus
nine x squared plus 24 x again when we're doing these types of problems.
Step number one is to actually find all the critical points.
So what do we do to find the critical points we need to find the numbers that make that derivative either
equal to zero or undefined.
So first of all let's find the derivative of the function.
So we're going to use the power rule.
So we bring down the 3 x squared minus.
We have a 9 to that stays outside times we bring down the two and we have X to the first power.
So that's just x plus we have a constant 24 and x to the 1.
But when you differentiate that you get access to the zero which is just one.
So let's simplify a little bit more.
We have 3 x squared
minus nine times 2 is 18 x
plus 24.
All right.
So we have a derivative.
Let's find the critical numbers that make this derivative either equal to zero or undefined.
But actually it cannot be undefined because there's no bottom.
So we'll just find the numbers that make this derivative equal to zero.
And I totally forgot this negative sign right here because it's minus nine times too.
So you have 3 x squared minus 18 next.
Plus 24.
Let's make that equal to zero.
All right so what can we do here.
So what we need to do is to factor now at the time of this recording.
I do not have a factoring video as part of the tutorial so please check out the resources for this video
in which you will find some resources to learn how to factor.
Please take a couple of minutes and check those out.
So as of right now what we need to do is we need to factor in order to find out what are the numbers
that make this equal to zero.
So what is a common thing that all these terms have three x squared X and 24.
Well first of all they're all divisible by three.
So you can actually factor out the three and put it outside.
So what you need to do now is take out the three from each of these wands and take watch remaining.
So if this was 3 x squared.
Now we only have the x squared.
This was 18 x.
Now it becomes 6 x and again that's because 6 x times 3 is 18.
So remember that when we factor what we're doing is we're saying OK if you multiply this and this then
it gives you the result.
And finally if we had 24 but then we'd divide by three.
We have eight.
So we have plus eight equals zero.
Now we actually have to factor further and factor this expression right here in the middle.
In parentheses because remember we're trying to find a number that would make this whole thing equal
to zero.
X this three by itself can never be zero.
So the zero has to be inside.
So we keep that three outside.
And then we factor here
as of right now just know that to factor X squared minus 6 x plus 8 then what you need to do is you
put an X at the beginning and next at the beginning here as well.
Then we bring down this line.
And the sign for the second is actually the multiplication of this sign in this site negative times
a positive is a negative.
And then finally we need to find two numbers so that when you multiply them you get this number.
And when you add them you get this number.
So it's actually going to be 4 and 2
because negative four times negative to positive 8 and negative four plus negative two is negative six.
All right.
All of this is equal to zero.
So we're multiplying three things.
The three the X minus 4 and the X minus 2.
So the three again can never be zero.
So we need to make sure that we find when this one can be zero.
And when this one can be zero and just by looking at it you can pretty much tell right one is X minus
four equal to zero.
Well when x is equal to four.
Right because four minus four is zero.
When you have a zero here and you multiply it with three and the X minus two.
That is going to give you zero.
Same thing for this one.
One is X minus two equal to zero.
Well when X equals two because two minus two is zero.
And then when you multiply with everything else you also get zero.
So we have two critical numbers
and they are for and to because again when you plug in for here you get a zero.
And when you plug in to here you get a zero.
Now that we have two critical numbers and by the way here I said that you need to find the critical
points.
Not exactly.
It's really just the critical numbers that you need to find.
And with that you can actually determine if you're dealing with maximums or minimums.
So step number two is to classify
your critical points.
And again we need to use now the first derivative test to classify these numbers that we have here and
let's go to our mnemonic like we said all you need to do is you need to draw a mountain and you need
to draw a whole.
All right.
So this is your max and this is your men and then you're going to test to the left and to the right.
So this is on the left.
This is on the right.
This is on the left and this is on the right.
So for a max on the left you have a positive slope because it's going up.
So this is positive on the right of the max.
You have a slope that's going down so it's negative for the men on the left.
You have a slope that's going down.
So it's a negative slope.
And for the right of the men we have a line that's going up.
So it's positive.
All right.
Knowing this let's go ahead and let's pick points to the left and to the right of the four and the two
and see what we get.
And if you have several critical numbers you can do them all on the same number line.
All right.
So we can say we're going to have this number line over here.
We're going to put a 2 here and we're going to put the four right here.
All right so let's pick values to the left on the right of the two and to the right of the four.
We don't need to test to the left of the four because that's covered by the number to the right of the
two.
Do you see what I mean like this interval to the right of the to the left of the four is the same interval.
So we're going to pick a test value here to the left of the two.
So that's going to be 0 that we're going to pick a number in between which is going to be three and
we're going to pick a number to the right of the four which is going to be you know what let's do 10
because 10 is a round number.
It's very easy to plug in.
All right.
So first of all let's go ahead and plug zero into our derivative and see what sign we get.
So our derivative is this one here.
So if we plug in zero we get three times zero squared minus 18 times zero.
Plus 24.
This is 0 0 and 24.
So it's positive.
That means that to the left of the two we have a positive slope.
Let's test our second number and I'll do this one a little bit more to the left just to gain some space.
Prime of what are we plug in in replug and in three
right.
So we have three.
And remember we're plugging the scent into the derivative just like increasing and decreasing intervals.
We need to test this out into the derivative.
Actually the name itself says it it's the first derivative test.
Do not plug this sin into the original function.
Instead do it on the first derivative.
So we're plugging in three into this first derivative.
So three times three squared minus 18 times three plus 24.
So this is three squared is nine times three is twenty seven.
So we have 27 minors 18 times three is 54 and then plus 24.
So negative 54 plus 24 is negative 30 negative 30 plus 27 is negative 3.
So this is negative.
So between the two and the four are critical numbers we have a negative slope.
All right and we only have one more thing to test and that is the 10 to the right of the four.
So let's plug in turn into our derivative.
So we have three times 10 squared.
Mine is 18 times 10
plus 24 that's going to be a big number.
It's 10 squared is a hundred times three's 300.
So 300 minus 18 times 10 is 180 plus 24 so that's 300 minus 180 that's 120 120 plus 24 is 144.
Definitely a positive number.
So to the right of the four we have a positive slope.
All right.
So we finally have our signs to the left and to the right of two and four.
At this point we can go ahead and classify.
Let's grab the first critical number two.
So to the left it's positive and to the right it's negative.
That means it is a max.
Why.
Because in a max mnemonic it says to the left you have a positive slope to the right you have a negative.
Same as here on the left you have a positive right.
You have a negative.
So I'll go ahead and write it over here.
We have a relative Max
at X equals two.
All right so perfect that is our first critical point which is to.
Now let's go for the four for the four we have negative to the left and positive to the right.
That means that it's actually a min because see here in a men you have negative slope on the left and
positive on the right which is what we have here.
Negative on the left and positive on the right.
Therefore we have a relative.
Men
at X equals four.
There we go.
We just found our critical points.
We actually then classify them and we determined that we have a relative Max Texaco's two and a half
men at X equals four.
However in theory we're not done.
We have one more step.
Remember we're trying to find the critical points themselves.
That means that we're going to have to get this to and this four and plug them in into the original
function.
So I don't want you to get confused the test values that we picked those go into the derivative because
we need to measure the slope of the line tangent.
However when we're actually finding the critical points.
Remember that we're finding those critical points for f of x.
So now that we have the x values of those critical points we need to find the corresponding y values.
That's why you plug those into the original.
So anytime you're doing one of these apply derivative problems I want you to think what am I getting
if I'm getting the critical point then where do I need to plug it in.
Well it's in the original because those critical points belong to the original function.
Or if you're testing values for derivatives they need to think I need to plug this into a derivative
instead.
So let's just go ahead and quickly find out the y values for these two x values so we can get the four
coordinates over relative Max and relative min.
So let's go ahead and plug it into into the original function.
So f of 2.
Again no prime.
Because we're plugging into the original that's going to give us two cubed minus nine times two squared
plus 24 times to two cubed is two times two times two that's eight minus two squared is four times nine
is minus 36 plus 24 times to 48 so 8 minus 36 is actually negative 28 negative 28 plus 48 is positive
20.
And let's do the same thing for our next x value which is four of four.
All right.
So we have four cubes minus nine rhymes for squared plus 24 times for
four cubed is four times four times four.
So that's four times four is 16 times four is 64 minus four square it is 16 and 16 times 9 is 144.
Finally we have 24 times 4 which is 96
so 64 minus 144 plus 96 is 16.
We just got our y values for these critical numbers.
So now we can actually write down the full x and y of our relative Max and realize if the points are
for the max it's two
20.
That's the corresponding y value and we have 4 16 that has a corresponding y value for 4.
These are our points and again to 20 is the max and the 416 is the min.
All right.
How do you feel about this problem.
It was kind of long right.
Yeah.
These first derivative problems tend to be a little bit long.
So it's a matter of getting used to it doing a lot of them.
So they don't seem scary anymore.
So yeah it definitely takes a little bit to get used to.
Let me just summarize what we did.
So we were asked to use the first derivative test to classify the relative extrema of this function.
So the first thing we need to do is find the critical points because remember relative extrema can only
occur at critical points.
So we find the derivative over function and we set it equal to zero.
We don't really need to check for undefined because there's no denominator There's no bottom.
So we said the derivative equals zero.
And we factor out the three.
After that we factor out this thing in parentheses which again will do.
More examples of that.
So you can understand how it actually works.
We determined that the derivative is 0 when X equals 4 and when X equals 2.
All right so these are critical numbers.